gnosis review — guidance for recording knowledge after a session

You've finished work. Before committing, review the session for
intangibles that should be recorded. This guide helps you decide
what's worth capturing and what isn't.

CODE COMMENT OR GNOSIS ENTRY?

For each candidate, first ask whether it has an obvious code anchor —
a specific line, function, or file where someone editing the code
would see it. If yes, it belongs as a comment there, not here. The
person most likely to undo a non-obvious decision is the one editing
that line; they'll read a comment but won't think to search gnosis.

Reach for gnosis only when the knowledge has no such anchor: it spans
multiple files, concerns something that was considered and not built,
or lives outside the code (vendor behavior, operational gotchas,
future intent).

WHAT TO LOOK FOR

Scan the session for moments where:
  - A cross-cutting direction was chosen over alternatives, and the
    reasoning matters across more than one place in the code.
  - An idea was explicitly rejected — and someone might try it again
    without knowing why it was ruled out. (There's no code to comment
    on, because the code was never written.)
  - A pain point or known flaw was mentioned in passing that doesn't
    pin to one spot.
  - Someone expressed intent to change something later.
  - A non-obvious external constraint came up that shaped the
    implementation.
  - Something was learned about the system's behavior that isn't
    captured in the code that was written and doesn't have a natural
    home as a comment.

RECORD OR NOT?

  "We're using Postgres 15 for the vector extensions."
  → No. That's visible in the stack and configuration.

  "We chose Postgres over DynamoDB because we need ad-hoc joins for
  the reporting module, and DynamoDB's query model couldn't support
  that without duplicating data across three tables."
  → Yes. The reasoning isn't in the code.

  "The user model has a 'role' field."
  → No. Read the code.

  "The 'role' field is a plain string instead of a foreign key because
  roles come from an external IdP and we don't want to sync them."
  → Yes. That's a decision with non-obvious reasoning.

  "The tests are slow."
  → No. Too vague, and anyone running them will notice.

  "The integration tests hit a real Stripe sandbox — don't parallelize
  them or you'll get rate-limited and they'll flake."
  → Yes. Hard-won operational knowledge that spans the whole suite
    and has no single line to attach to.

  "This if-check uses '== true' instead of a truthy test because the
  upstream action emits the literal string 'false', which Actions
  treats as truthy."
  → No — make it a comment on that line. The person who'd "simplify"
    it is editing that exact line; a gnosis entry won't catch them.

  "I added a cache to the search endpoint."
  → No. The code shows this.

  "We added a cache to search because uncached p99 was 800ms and the
  SLA is 200ms. We chose a 60s TTL as a compromise — stale results
  are acceptable for this use case but the product team doesn't want
  them older than a minute."
  → Yes. The constraints and tradeoff reasoning aren't in the code.

BE SELECTIVE

A few precise entries are worth more than a wall of noise. Each entry
should carry enough context that someone encountering it months later
understands why it matters without needing the original conversation.

If something is already in the code you wrote, the commit message, or
existing documentation, it doesn't belong here.

TIDYING

Stale knowledge is worse than no knowledge. If during your review you
notice an existing entry that's been superseded by work in this
session, either remove it ("gnosis rm") or write a new entry that
references it ("gnosis write ... --related <old-id>") explaining what
changed. Don't leave contradictions in the system.

WRITING

  gnosis write <topics> "<text>" [--related id,id]

Topics are comma-separated. Use names that match the system's shape.
If an entry relates to an existing one, use --related to link them.

Example:
  gnosis write search-endpoint,caching "We added a 60s TTL cache to
  search because uncached p99 was 800ms against a 200ms SLA. Stale
  results are acceptable but product wants them under a minute."
